Введенный текст: 
Technology is the continually developing result of accumulated knowledge and application in all techniques, skills, methods, and processes used in industrial production and scientific research. Technology is embedded in the operation of all machines, with or without detailed knowledge of their function, for the intended purpose of an organization. The technologies of society consist of what is known as systems. Systems apply the intended application of a technology's accumulated knowledge by obtaining an input, altering this input for the system's intended purpose through what is known as a process, and then producing an outcome that alters the ultimate intended purpose of the system. This is also known as a technology system or technological system.

The earliest and simplest form of technology is the development of knowledge that leads to the application of basic tools towards an intended purpose. The prehistoric invention of shaped stone tools and the discovery of how to control fire and increased the sources of food that were available to human beings through the proper cooking procedures that eliminated almost all disease-causing pathogens in food sources. The event that occurred after, the Neolithic Revolution, extended the importance of this event and quadrupled the sustenance available from a usable territory through the development of farming technologies.

The invention of the wheel led to the travelling technologies that helped humans not only further increase the yield of food production over a given period, but also travel between and across territories in less time, where information could be more easily exchanged between members of society. Not only did this circumstance result in an increased total of food production and increased information exchange over large territories, but also the increased production of raw materials, such as spinning thread or yarn, through the invention of the spinning wheel. Since these raw materials can be processed into paper, the opportunity to provide information to a larger population had also become available during this period in history.

Developments in the usage of the wheel had not only led to the development of the printing press, but also to the development of the telephone, the computer, and then the Internet. In other words, as technology develops passed the wheel, information exchange through the telephone, computer, and internet began to operate through the input and output function of a processor, which is more specifically known as a central processing unit (CPU). As the focus shifted from the further advancements of the wheel towards the CPU, we started to also focus on the research that advances in storage devices, behind the central processing unit. As a result of the continual focus in the research of processors and storage devices, technological developments have not only increased information exchange, but have also allowed people to conclusively pave the road for self-regulated and self-operating technology for nearly unregulated or completely unregulated societal development. By reducing the previous communication barriers and equipping computer components with the necessary advances through research to acquire technological self-regulation, civilization will most likely experience what is known in the future as the technological singularity.

While technology, technological advances, and ultimately the pursuit of society towards the technological singularity has helped economies develop and create the rise of a leisure class, many technological processes produce unwanted by-products, known as pollution, and the depletion of natural resources from the Earth's environment. As a consequence, philosophical debates have arisen over the use of technology and whether technology improves or worsens the human condition. Neo-Luddism, anarcho-primitivism, and similar reactionary movements criticize the pervasiveness of technology by stating that technology harms the environment and destroys human relationships. While this is the case, ideologies such as transhumanism and techno-progressivism view continued technological progress as beneficial to society and the human condition. Although technology continues to be questioned and debated, the important function of technological advancement continues to prosper as the centerpiece of industrial production and scientific research.

While Innovations have always influenced the values of a society and have raised new questions in the ethics of technology, the advancement of technology itself has also led to the pursuit of new solutions for the previously discussed concerns of technological advancement. For example, upcoming technology involves renewable resources being used in transportation, allowing humans to travel in space, for technology itself to become more affordable and reliable, and for automation to help the lives of billions of people. As technology creates the necessary solutions to our concerns through intellectual discovery, society advances the importance and application of technology in the 21st century.

Вариант 11: латиница, по кол-ву символов в слове, по убыванию, учитывать числа, быстрая сортировка
Количество слов: 759
Время сортировки 16 миллисекунд
Статистика (количество слов каждой длины):
[1] - 15
[2] - 123
[3] - 142
[4] - 77
[5] - 55
[6] - 46
[7] - 71
[8] - 56
[9] - 56
[10] - 54
[11] - 35
[12] - 12
[13] - 16
[14] - 1
