Aircraft Performance and Design
VI Turboprop and Turbofan Aircraft
Turboprops and turbofans are gas turbine engines, as is the turbojet, and are designed to minimize the disadvantages of and exploit the advantages inherent in piston–prop and turbojet engines. The fundamental difference among these three engines is in how they produce thrust. The turbojet does it by expansion of hot gases through a nozzle, the turboprop uses a propeller, and the turbofan uses a multibladed fan, which is related in many ways to the propeller. The basic element of a gas turbine engine is the gas generator, made up of the compressor(s), the burners, and the turbines that drive the compressor. The mixture of air and fuel that passes through the gas generator is the primary flow. The gas generator and primary flow are common to all three engines and serve as a baseline for a comparative evaluation.
In a turbojet, the exhaust gases from the gas generator expand through a nozzle and thrust is the only output. It is a single-flow engine whose distinguishing characteristics are its light weight, small frontal area, propulsive efficiency that increases with airspeed, high specific fuel consumption (the highest of the three), and low thrust at low airspeeds.
In a turboprop, there are two flows: a primary flow that develops jet thrust and a secondary (much larger) flow through the propeller that produces thrust power. The turboprop is primarily a power producer and is described in similar terms as the piston–prop. The turboprop is primarily a replacement for the piston–prop since it is capable of higher airspeeds and greater range for a given aircraft weight because of its much lighter engine weight and lower CD0. Although heavier than a turbojet or a turbofan because of the propeller and gearbox, it is of the order of four times lighter than a piston–prop of the same horsepower. Furthermore, although the frontal area is somewhat larger than that of a turbojet, it is less than that of a piston–prop, and when the engine is operating, the CD0 is of the order of that of a turbojet, which means higher Em's than a piston–prop. The presence of the jet thrust, which though relatively small is essentially constant, tends to flatten the thrust curves at the higher speeds and to reduce the rate of decrease of the propulsive efficiency. The turboprop has a low specific fuel consumption, of the order of but somewhat higher than that of the piston–prop. One other major advantage over the piston–prop is its much lower maintenance costs. Although its initial cost is higher, it is a simpler engine with greater reliability, especially with the recent improvements in the gearbox.
A turbofan is a multiflow engine similar in many respects to a turboprop, except that the additional turbines directly drive a fan that resembles an axial flow compressor. Even though with very high bypass ratios the turbofan may produce more power than thrust and perform more like a turboprop than a trubojet, it is customary to describe it as though it were a turbojet.
The turbofan combines the good propulsive efficiency and high thrust at lower airspeeds of the piston–prop with the constant thrust and increasing propulsive efficiency at the higher airspeeds of the turbojet. Since the complexity and weight of the reduction gearbox and propeller governor system of the turboprop are eliminated, the turbofan is even simpler and lighter. Furthermore, the airflow through the ducted fan is not greatly affected by the airspeed, so that the decrease in propulsive efficiency at high airspeeds is not as significant as the decrease associated with the propeller efficiency of the turboprop. Consequently, the turbofan can be used at airspeeds up to and including low supersonic airspeeds. Although the frontal area is larger than that of the turbojet, the turbofan is considerably shorter and the overall drag is not necessarily larger. The specific fuel consumption is much less than of the turbojet and, although it is more than that of the turboprop, it approaches comparable values. The turbofan is also quieter than the turbojet and much quieter than the turboprop, an advantage in these days of increasing concern with noise pollution.
Since both the turboprop and turbofan are multiflow engines, the equivalent specific fuel consumptions are combinations of hpsfc's and tsfc's and thus will vary with airspeed. Any value quoted in the literature is for a specific airspeed, which is not always given. The variation in the specific fuel consumption with airspeed is greater for the turbofan than for the turboprop.
Since turboprops and turbofans represent different combinations of the piston–prop and turbojet, their performance should fall somewhere between that of the piston–prop and that of the pure turbojet. Comparing turboprop, turbofan, and turbojet engines of comparable power (comparable gas generators), one finds that the turboprop will deliver the largest amount of thrust at the lower airspeeds, to include the aircraft standing still at the start of the takeoff run. The thrust, however, will decrease at the most rapid rate of the three as the airspeed increases and, at liftoff, will probably be less than the other two. The turbofan will produce less thrust than the turboprop at lower speeds but more than the turbojet, which not only improves the takeoff and early climb performance but also allows higher gross weights for takeoff than the turbojet. The thrust decreases with increasing airspeed but at a slower rate than does that of the turboprop because of the differences between a fan and a propeller and because of the larger jet thrust component. As the bypass ratio increases, the performance of the turbofan approaches that of the turboprop at the lower airspeeds but retains some of the characteristics of the turbojet at the higher airspeeds. The turbojet has the lowest initial thrust of the three, but the thrust essentially remains constant with airspeed.
With respect to the other aspects of performance, the turboprop is sufficiently similar to the piston–prop that it is a reasonable approximation simply to use the piston–prop equations without modification. The turbofan, however, is not necessarily as simple or as straightforward. If the bypass ratio is low, the turbojet equations can be used without modification. As the bypass ratio is increased and the ratio of power to thrust increases, the turbofan takes on more of the characteristics of the turboprop and piston–prop, particularly at the lower airspeeds. It is still possible to use the turbojet equations with the realization that the actual low-speed values might be somewhat different. At the higher airspeeds, the turbofan will perform more like a turbojet but with a lower specific fuel consumption.
Because of its superior fuel efficiency, the turbofan quickly replaced the turbojet for subsonic aircraft, and the turboprop replaced the piston–prop in many applications (such as commuter aircraft) because of its lighter weight and higher airspeeds. In recent years, however, the smaller regional jet (RJ), with 30–100 seats, is rapidly replacing the turboprop as a feeder and short-range commercial aircraft (see Fig. 8). Although the RJ fuel efficiency is lower than that of the turboprop, the RJ has the advantages of higher cruising altitudes (above turbulence and weather), shorter flight times, less noise, and possibly higher public acceptance because of its more modern appearance.
